---
layout: post
author: "Aashish Kumar"
title: "Git it! - Simplified Git Tutorial (Part 2)."
subtitle: "From making your first commit, to squashing them together."
bg_url: "https://source.unsplash.com/MSN8TFhJ0is/800x800"
---

If there is a tool of software that every software developer must know, it is *GIT*. Everyone will agree that we all struggle with it initially, when we start learning it. So I'm here to ease the burden from the shoulders of the beginners, who are just starting with this amazing tool.

__Let's Git it!__

We'll be learning the following topics today:-

- ~~Understanding Git (How it Works?)~~
- ~~Installation and Setup~~
- How to commit?
- Git + Github
- Rebasing
- Squashing

__Note :- This is the part 2 and contains the topics other than the first two. Head to [part 1]({% post_url 2020-05-05-git-it-p1 %}) for first two topics.__

## How to commit!

Now we'll be assuming that you've successfully installed git and have it up and running. So as you've setup an empty git repository in the folder, and if you haven't, just run the following command:

```python
git init
```

This will initialize an empty git repository and a `.git` folder will be created. Now as we've initialized a repo, you need to add the files that need to be tracked by git. For reference we've created some temporary files, following is the file structure:

```python
├── file1.txt
├── file2.txt
├── .git
└── temp_folder
    └── file3.txt
```

Each file contains text as "I am fileX.txt", where X is the file number we're in.

Now first run the status command to know the status of the git repository.

```python
git status
```

The output is:

```python
On branch master

Initial commit

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)

	file1.txt
	file2.txt
	temp_folder/

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

The output shows that all the files and folders are untracked and can be added to the repository, also we're currently on the deafult `master` branch. So in order to add all the files for tracking, run the following command:

```python
git add .
```

where `.` means that add all the files/folders in the current directory for tracking, you can specify the name of a specific file or directory which you want to track instead of the `.`, but we're adding all files. Now again run the status command `git status`.

```python
On branch master

Initial commit

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)

	new file:   file1.txt
	new file:   file2.txt
	new file:   temp_folder/file3.txt
```

Now the output shows that git has tracked all the new files and they have changes that need to be commited. So now you're ready to make your first commit and save the changes by creating your first checkpoint. Run the following command:

```python
git commit -am "My first commit"
```

Here `-a` flag means to take snapshot of all the changes in the current working directory and `-m` flag is used to pass the commit description or message in the command itself. If you don't use the `-m` flag then git will automatically open a text editor, in which you had to write the commit message or description.

The output:

```python
[master (root-commit) 2282d7f] My first commit
 3 files changed, 3 insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 file1.txt
 create mode 100644 file2.txt
 create mode 100644 temp_folder/file3.txt
```

Kaboom! Congrats on your first commit. Run the `git status` command to check the status.

```python
On branch master
nothing to commit, working directory clean
```

It says that now you've no changes left to commit and you've successfully created your first checkpoint. Now in order to check the commit log, run the log command:

```python
git log
```

This command lists all the commits that you've made till now:

```haskell
commit 2282d7ff037132a3c390518c82d776d0b86f6a29
Author: Aashish Kumar <aashish.kumar@devbae.tech>
Date:   Wed May 6 04:08:05 2020 +0530

    My first commit
```

The random words on the top is a called a commit hash, which is like a unique id given to each commit in order to differentiate between two commits.

Now if you make any changes in any of the tracked files and run the `git status` command, you'll be able to see the changes being actively tracked and when you commit those changes, they'll be automatically saved.

As you now know how to commit, go make some changes, make commits and play around with commiting (I'd suggest atleast make 3-4 more commits). Always remember the three steps - make changes in files, add those files for tracking and commit them, also try to give unique commit message everytime, describing the changes that you've made.

Hopefully you would've created a few commits/checkpoints by now. So in order to revisit a particular checkpoint, you need to first run the `git log` command:

```python
commit f181e0eeb09b72b6419f07baa51f1b0e2c13d5bc
Author: Aashish Kumar <aashish.kumar@devbae.tech>
Date:   Wed May 6 04:49:09 2020 +0530

    Deleted file3

commit 151c1b257e1214290e51f189d99a2faf99901afa
Author: Aashish Kumar <aashish.kumar@devbae.tech>
Date:   Wed May 6 04:48:40 2020 +0530

    Changed file2

commit 2bca72097fd1f8aa7efb436202a336cabcd9fc1b
Author: Aashish Kumar <aashish.kumar@devbae.tech>
Date:   Wed May 6 04:48:08 2020 +0530

    Changed file1

commit 2282d7ff037132a3c390518c82d776d0b86f6a29
Author: Aashish Kumar <aashish.kumar@devbae.tech>
Date:   Wed May 6 04:08:05 2020 +0530

    My first commit

```

This shows all my commits with their unique commit hashes and description. Now for e.g you want to revisit the 2nd commit i.e you want your project to be in the state, when the 2nd commit was made, just copy the commit hash of the 2nd commit and run the following command:

```python
git checkout 2bca72097fd1f8aa7efb436202a336cabcd9fc1b
```

Now if you check your files, you'll see you're in the same state as when you made the 2nd commit i.e in my case file3 will exist and file2 would not have any changes as I made those commits later. Now in order to get back to the present state, run the following command.

```python
git checkout master
```

This will take the HEAD to it's original state. Now you already know the basic working of git. Now let's welcome Github and learn it too.

## Git + Github

Now in order to share your git repositories, you need a server which can host your repos, so that you can easily share them with others. [Github](https://github.com) does exactly that, a server to save git repositories with a very cool and easy to understand web-based graphical interface, it also provides you various collaboration features for your projects like wikis etc. Now we'll be learning how to host your git repo on [Github](https://github.com).


Booyah! You've successfully completed Part 2. How does it feel to be a git expert? Let us know in the comments below.
